# Reply to Review Comments on _RcppCNPy: Read-Write Support for NumPy Files in R_

Thank you for your very detailed review and comments.

The package and paper have been updated updated to reflect these suggestions, and the
additional documentation is very beneficial.

This reply contains two major section. The first is 'open issues' and addresess items
which were brought up as required improvements or changes.  The second is 'comments' and
either responds to some minor items, or provides other clarification.


## Open Issues

### Functionality: Installation

R packages need to be loaded, so `library("RcppCNPy")` (which is case-sensitive) is indeed
required.  

We do have a section in the `README.md` showing this as floating point (shown below) and
also integer:

```r
R> library(RcppCNPy)
R> fmat <- npyLoad("fmat.npy")
```

The package contains a demo file (which can be executed via `demo("timings", package="RcppCNPy"`) 
showing this, and the vignette also shows it. 

To be even more explicit we added this also to the 'Examples' sections of the help pages.

That provides four different instances showing how to load the package and perform a few
first steps which should be sufficient for users of the package.

### Documentation: Automated Tests

The package already contains tests which are executed each time `R CMD check` runs. The
standard R mechanism of using files in the top-level directory `tests/` is used.

There are two levels of tests. 

Files ending in `.Rout.save` provide (persistent) reference output which is compared
character-by-character to freshly created output during a test.  Any differences are
reported (but are not fatal).

Additionally, the file `tests/loadFiles.R` contains five `stopifnot()` tests which would
abort unless the tested condition (of comparing read content to expected content) are met
exactly. That provides stringent unit testing.

It is unclear whether an additional markdown or README file is required as the package
conforms to standard R and CRAN practice.

### Documentation: Community Guidelines

The `DESCRIPTION` file lists the standard GitHub facilities:

```
BugReports: https://github.com/eddelbuettel/rcppcnpy/issues
```

By being on GitHub and listing the repository, the standard and well-known participation
venues offered by GitHub are available.

Following this suggestion, we made this more explicit by adding a short section to the
README.md as well.

### Software Paper: References 

We added the DOIs (as supplied by the publisher) for one of the two references.  The
second reference does not yet have a DOI.

We also added the DOI for this submission as a 'badge' to the main `README.md`.



## Comments

### General Checks: Repository

The installation command for R is case-sensitive so the most recent released version can
be installed via `install.packages("RcppCNPy").

Should this be desired, R also allows installation directly from the GitHub repository by
supplying `eddelbuettel/rcppcnpy` as the (unique) 'author/repo' token.  But as RcppCNPy is
a CRAN package so we prefer the more common first approach using `install.packages()`.

### General Check: License 

[Line 17 of `DESCRIPTION`](https://github.com/eddelbuettel/rcppcnpy/blob/master/DESCRIPTION#L17)
clearly states `License: GPL (>= 2)`. This exact form is described in the corresponding R
manuals, and _e.g._ expands on the
[CRAN webpage for the package](https://cloud.r-project.org/web/packages/RcppCNPy/index.html)
to 'GPL-2 | GPL-3'.  Both licenses are
[OSI approved](https://opensource.org/licenses/alphabetical), and used by R itself in the same form.

The GNU statement was already present at `src/cnpyMod.cpp`, the main C++ intgegration
script. Files `src/cnpy.cpp` and `src/cnpy.h` carry both a statement for the MIT license
of the underlying cnpy library by Rogers, and the a short sentence stating GPL for the
additional integration provided by this package.

The remaining source file `R/cnpy.R` is a one-liner so that adding a copyright header
seemed excessive.


### Functionality: Performance

In general, code from a vignette can always be extracted via `Stangle()`.  Here, we chose
to keep the result fixed and static to not endure the (still short) simulation on each
latex-compilation of the vignette.  However, the package contains a demo detailing this
which can be seen via `demo("timings", package="RcppCNPy")`. It contains the same
benchmark.  This permits each user to validate performance locally.

### Documentation: Statement of Need

The package provides an input/ouput facility so that R users can read and/or write files
in the NumPy format.  As such, it the target audience is not restricted to any class or
set of users, members of discipline, or methodological school.

The key focus is stated is stated in the package description, in the first full sentence
in the README.md, and in the first line of the abstract of the vignette.

### Documentation: Installation Instructions

As an R package, there should be rather a limited need for the Python specifics
particularly as every NumPy version appears to provide the identical output. As such, we
have not seen any need to provide more detail.

### Documentation: Functionality Documentation

As an R package, primary documentation is provided via the help pages, and then the vignette.  Both detail how to use the package.  

### Recommendation To The Author

Adding `.npz` files has long been noted as possible extensions, this is also explicitly
stated in the vignette.  Development of the package was needs-driven: we needed to process
certain files, and the `npz` was not a format we used.  Pull-requests by users with the
need to process such files are therefore strongly encouraged.

The need to explicitly request `integer` format is a limitation of the format and the
underlying library. There appears to be no meta-data signalling the content.

### Recommendation To JOSS

I second this recommendation.
